---
svg: test.svg
title:  Introduction
dek: This is a book that tries to re-imagine the graphic design curriculum by using a programming language as the tool for the designer.
---

{% include header.html %}

For a long time, the role of a graphic designer was rather easy to define. It meant working with your hands to find the right visual form for a piece of content, and printing a static design in the form of a poster, business card, letterhead, etc. Amazingly clever and beautiful art has been created this way.

However, we find ourselves at an interesting time in the design world, not because this definition of design has changed much, but because the products we're required to build have changed. Looking at the media landscape of today, it's hard to find a design product that hasn't changed because of the digital revolution. Designing layouts for a smartphone app means taking into account a complex set of states, where each screen can have tens or hundreds of possible transitions. Designing the scenery of most computer games forces the designer to use procedural techniques, because it is simply impossible to design every game object by hand. Even logos are becoming dynamic, with designers building dynamic identities fit for representing many faces of the same entity. Common to all of these examples is that none of them can be built using traditional design tools, and all of them require the use of a programming language.

This book is the result of a simple question: What happens when we try to redefine the graphic design curriculum using a programming language as the tool for the designer? For some readers, this will be a provocative question. The field of graphic design is rooted in the fine arts, and students still go through curricula based on traditions taught by painting, sculpture, and architecture. This is of course a great positive, and this book builds upon that very foundation. However, when this tradition is used to wrongly turn designers into luddites (Paul Rand famously said *&ldquo;It’s important to use your hands. This is what distinguishes you from a cow or a computer operator&rdquo;*^[Michael Kroeger, *Paul Rand: Conversations with Students* (2008)]), designers are institutionalized to think of themselves as direct opposites to technical people: creatives, who come up with concepts for other people to execute. This contradicts a century-long bond between design and advances in technology, and if designers do not become fluent in this new digital reality, they will simply become irrelevant.

For others, this question will make perfect sense. Programming a piece of software is not the same as printing a poster, and the field of graphic design will need to evolve with new techniques and tools as demands change. It's important for designers to learn how to code (or programmers to acquire design skills), simply because history shows us that systems can be expressive, creative, and challenge many of the notions inherited from traditional design labor. Furthermore, today these theories can be more than theoretical instructions for a manual workflow. We have the ability to write computer programs that create designs, and the designer of the future will need to understand how to deliver on that promise. Thankfully, graphic design is a skill that you first learn by applying a set of very specific rules, and there is no reason that those rules cannot be written in code.

This is a book that teaches you how to make designs in code, and how to evaluate the success of these designs. The book is written for both programmers wanting to become better designers, as well as for designers wanting to use computer programming in their design process. It is my hope that it will serve as an inspiration for new types of design projects, and help break down the barriers between two powerful sciences: Graphic design and computer science. The book is structured like many other books on visual design with a focus on the basic elements of graphic design (form, color, typography, grid systems), and with concrete examples to demonstrate how to use these elements. As you go through the text, you will notice that it starts with the very basics. The code will be simple, and the exercises will be very constrained. If this feels simplistic, keep reading. We will soon enough touch upon more challenging themes. These simple relationships are also the most important ones, and they lay the foundation for some of the more complex ideas.

What makes this book different is that all examples are written in JavaScript, and much of the content is focused on the very techniques that makes coding such a wonderfully expressive medium for designers. Although these examples can be embedded on any web page, it is important to note that this is not a book about web design. This book aims to teach designers how to create visual designs in code, but these techniques can be applied to both digital and print work. In fact, I have seen my students use JavaScript for a wide range of design projects over the years, including sculpture, painting, fashion design, photography, web design, game design, and print design.

P5.jS HERE!
The text is written for readers with an introductory knowledge of programming in JavaScript, which means that little time will be devoted to explaining concepts like variables, functions, and loops. For this audience, I highly recommend Daniel Shiffman's [video tutorials](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLRqwX-V7Uu6Zy51Q-x9tMWIv9cueOFTFA) on the subject, where Dan does a much better job at explaining these concepts than I ever could. Although the examples are created using [P5.js](http://p5js.org), I have tried to write the text to be as general as possible, and all concepts should easily be portable to whatever graphics programming language you prefer.

I'm not the first author to write about systems in graphic design, and this book builds upon ideas from many incredible authors, who are too numerous to mention. Even within the last ten years, lots have been written about the computer's impact on graphic design. A majority of this literature, however, consists of portfolio books showcasing the end products, without a discussion of how to evaluate whether these algorithmic design products are successful or not. At worst, this comes with a blind fascination of code-based designs, written by people who are not programmers. I often discourage my students to read books on generative design, which too often is another term for splattering a canvas with algorithmic drawing. That is not what this book is about. I am interested in introducing systems-thinking to the proven art of graphic design, not to replace the foundations of design with the unnecessarily complex.

I have chosen to publish this book for free online without a publisher. The main reason for this is freedom, as it allows me to write and design the book according to my own preference. This shows in the structure of the book, which consists of many shorter chapters that makes it better to read on the web. It also makes it easier for teachers to remix chapters for use in classrooms (which is completely legal and free because of the Creative Commons license). I will be writing these chapters in a non-linear fashion, working on the topics that I find the most interesting at the given time. There is no concrete deadline for the finished book, although I am pursuing it as a full-time endeavor. The full source code for this book is available on [GitHub](https://github.com/runemadsen/programmingdesignsystems.com/tree/master/content).

I would like to thank a group of people, without whom this book would never have existed. When I moved to New York in 2009 to study at [The Interactive Telecommunications Program](https://tisch.nyu.edu/itp) at Tisch School of the Arts, New York University, I only had a vague notion of wanting to work in the intersection between art and code. As a Flash developer who primarily built banners for advertising, the two years at ITP completely changed my thinking. I would like to thank Dan'O Sullivan for his enormous support for this project, which started as a class at ITP, and is currently growing into its current form while I'm supported by ITP as a visiting resident. This book would not exist without the help and mentorship of Daniel Shiffman, whose dedication to his students is only surpassed by his talents in writing. I want to thank Stewart Smith, who taught the *Visualizing Data* class where the very idea for this book began. My thanks go to all of the ITP faculty who helped shape these ideas, including Danny Rozin, Clay Shirky, Tom Igoe, David Nolen, Gabe Barcia-Colombo, and George Agudow. A special thanks go to Lauren McCarthy, the original author of P5.js, and to Casey Reas and Ben Fry ....
MARIA
FAMILY

{{ footnotes }}
